Our text comments mention
our dealings with unbelieving family members
and the need for us to put our loyalty to Jehovah
ahead of our love for them.
Now, that raises some questions.
Why might loyalty to Jehovah
over love for family be an issue?
Is there a Bible character
who set an example for us
in putting loyalty to Jehovah
ahead of love for family?
And how can we display loyalty to Jehovah
while still showing love
to our unbelieving family members?
Our first question is,
Why, at times, is loyalty to Jehovah
over love for family an issue?
Well, Jesus said it would be.
Please turn with me to Matthew chapter 10.
And here Jesus explained that one effect
of a person’s becoming a Christian
would be that relatives might oppose.
At Matthew chapter 10,
notice verses 34 and 35:
“Do not think I came
to bring peace to the earth;
“I came to bring, not peace, but a sword.
“For I came to cause division,
with a man against his father,
“and a daughter against her mother,
and a daughter-in-law
against her mother-in-law.”
Now, in saying
“Do not think I came to bring peace,”
Jesus meant that some of his listeners
needed to think of the consequences
of becoming his follower.
Holding faithfully to his teachings
would be challenging
if family members would reject the truth.
And perhaps some of us have experienced that.
When we became Jehovah’s Witnesses,
we were opposed by our family.
Perhaps we’re still being opposed,
or they may have opposed our decisions
to set and achieve spiritual goals,
such as pioneering or coming to Bethel.
This was true of one member
of our Bethel family.
When this brother
accepted the truth as a young person,
he stated that his father
was very disappointed in him.
His father was confused,
since prior to studying the Bible,
this brother’s worldly pursuits
were turning out well.
And then when our brother
was invited to Bethel,
he stated that his father
was really puzzled and concerned.
He felt that his son
was not making right choices in life.
The brother wrote this:
“My dad had always been
a loving and responsible father.
“We lacked nothing
and had his active support.
“Now I felt like I was letting him down,
“as if I was turning my back on him
“and not showing him the appreciation
that a father deserves.
This was hard for me.”
The brother’s feelings were real.
And it’s true
that we don’t want to hurt our family.
It’s normal to love
our unbelieving family members.
So why the issue?
Because we decided
and proved by our dedication
that we’re going to put
our loyalty to Jehovah
ahead of our love for family.
And when some family members realize that,
they may feel that we’re rejecting them,
and that can create a division
like that caused by a sword,
as Jesus stated here in Matthew chapter 10.
Is there a Bible character
who set an example of loyalty to Jehovah
over love for family?
Well, how about
this individual on our monitors
—Jonathan, the son of King Saul?
Shortly after David defeated Goliath,
1 Samuel chapter 18 tells us
that “Jonathan and David
became bound together in close friendship.”
They made a covenant
because Jonathan loved David as himself.
So for the rest of his life,
Jonathan was loyal to David
—Jehovah’s chosen one—
and thus Jonathan was loyal to Jehovah.
Now, as we know, in time,
Jonathan’s father, King Saul,
was determined to kill David.
So Jonathan faced a conflict of loyalties.
Would he continue
to put his loyalty to Jehovah
ahead of his love for family?
Well, we know he did.
But look at the division that resulted.
Please turn with me to 1 Samuel chapter 20,
and let’s read together verses 30 through 33.
Notice the division
between Jonathan and his father
—1 Samuel 20:30:
“Then Saul became enraged with Jonathan,
“and he said to him:
‘You son of a rebellious woman,
“‘do you think I do not know
“‘that you are choosing to side
with the son of Jesse,
“‘to your own shame
and to the shame of your mother?
“‘As long as the son of Jesse
is alive on the earth,
“‘you and your kingship
will not be firmly established.
“So now send someone
to bring him to me, for he must die.’
“However, Jonathan said to Saul his father:
“‘Why should he be put to death?
“What has he done?’
“At that Saul
hurled the spear at him to strike him,
so Jonathan knew that his father
was determined to put David to death.”
Talk about family opposition!
Now, few, if any, of us
have experienced that type of response
from unbelieving relatives.
So, what would Jonathan do?
Would he begin to reason
that he needed to now change his priorities
and put love of family
ahead of loyalty to Jehovah?
The answer is in verse 42:
“Jonathan said to David:
‘Go in peace,
“‘since we have both sworn
in the name of Jehovah, saying,
“‘“May Jehovah be between you and me
and between your offspring
and my offspring forever.”’”
So loyalty to God had first place
in Jonathan’s heart,
and he proved his loyalty to Jehovah
ahead of his love for family.
Now, he still supported
and cooperated with his father when possible.
How do we know?
When the Philistines were battling Israel,
1 Samuel 31:2 states:
“The Philistines kept in close range of Saul
“and his sons,
“and the Philistines struck down Jonathan,
Abinadab, and Malchi-shua, Saul’s sons.”
So Jonathan supported his father
down to the end of his life.
Yet, Jonathan’s loyalty was with Jehovah.
What an outstanding example for those of us
with unbelieving family members!
We still love them.
We still support them as we’re able,
but we put our loyalty to Jehovah
ahead of our love for them.
Now, how can we display
Jonathanlike loyalty to Jehovah
and still show love
for our unbelieving family members?
That’s our third question.
Well, we can let Bible principles guide us.
Here are five principles that can help,
four of which appeared
in the Watchtower  article
that our comments are taken from.
Point 1: If conflicts arise
with unbelieving family members,
try to reason with them in a loving way.
Earlier, we read 1 Samuel 20:32,
where Jonathan
tried to reason with Saul about David.
Remember the questions he asked?
“Why should he be put to death?
What has he done?”
Of course, reasoning may not always work
as it didn’t with Saul,
but it doesn’t mean we shouldn’t try.
Point 2: Have empathy
for unbelieving relatives.
Try to see things from their viewpoint,
and listen carefully
to understand their concerns.
Proverbs 20:5 states:
“The thoughts of a man’s heart
are like deep waters,
but the discerning man draws them out.”
Point 3: Speak with mildness.
We can ask Jehovah
for his holy spirit to display its fruitage
when speaking with our relatives.
If they hurt us by their speech or actions,
we can do as 1 Corinthians 4:12, 13 states:
“When insulted, we bless;
“when persecuted, we patiently endure;
when slandered, we answer mildly.”
Point 4: Maintain fine conduct.
Although mild speech is helpful
in dealing with opposing relatives,
our good conduct can speak even louder.
First Peter 3:16 states:
“Maintain a good conscience,
“so that in whatever way
you are spoken against,
“those who speak against you
may be put to shame
because of your good conduct
as followers of Christ.”
Point 5: Plan ahead.
Proverbs 22:3:
“The shrewd one
sees the danger and conceals himself.”
Now, it’s not that we
should conceal ourselves
from our unbelieving relatives
but, rather, when visiting them,
think of situations or topics
that might lead to conflict
and determine
how to handle them ahead of time.
So those are five Bible principles
that can help us to display love
to our unbelieving relatives
and still prove our loyalty to Jehovah.
How did things work out
for the Bethelite we mentioned earlier?
His father stated:
“My son’s determination and seriousness
was convincing
“and helped me to appreciate
that he was serious
“about his decision to serve Jehovah.
“Later, when I visited Bethel,
“I was thoroughly impressed
with the cleanliness and organization.
I was convinced
that he made the right decision.”
The son concludes:
“My dad is now serving Jehovah.
“He is a regular pioneer with my mom,
and we serve on the same body of elders.”
As was the case with this brother
and Jonathan the son of Saul,
let’s continue to put our loyalty to Jehovah
ahead of our love for family.